# Introduction to Git

* The underlying concept of Git is beautifully simple, built around the commit.
* It is also tremendously powerful
* However, remember that with great power comes great responsibility
* Many people agree that the user experience for new users is pretty hideous, not helped by the documentation that uses multiple terms for the same concepts, and often different ways to accomplish the same task, the terms used are familiar from other version control systems, but often mean different things in Git
* James World a consultant who has introduced Git to several teams and has a great Git Deep Dive session he has presented at a number of conferences and meetup groups, says that although people new to Git pick up the basics pretty quickly he finds it takes most people three to six months to start to get their heads around it

* Git started life as a week long project of Linus Torvalds to replace the old version control system they were using to manage contributions to the Linux Kernel. The new system had to be:
    * Fast
    * Simple Design
    * Strong support for non-linear development (thousands of parallel branches)
    * Fully distributed
    * Able to handle large projects like the Linux kernel efficiently in both speed and size
* It has accomplished this and as a result it is now almost the defacto standard for version control systems.
* For a long while despite producing their own version control system for TFS, Microsoft teams were internally using Git

* When learning to use Git, try to *not* think about it in the same way as you do for existing version control systems, Git stores and thinks about information differently from these systems and it can get confusing

* Snapshots not Differences: Most other version control systems store information as details of changes to files, Git is different. Git thinks of its data more like a set of snapshots of a miniature file system. It uses links to not store a new version of an unchanged file, but internally Git is handing changes a stream of snapshots.

* Nearly every operation is local: Git is designed to operate in a distributed way so has the entire history of a project locally, so if you need to go back to an old version of the file, Git can perform a fast local difference calculation rather than having to pull the old version off a remote server. This also means that if a server repository fails or is corrupted the server can be built from local repositories as these have all the changes too.

* Git has integrity: Everything in Git is check-summed before it is stored, and then is referred to internally by that checksum. You can't lose information in transit or have a file corrupt without Git knowing about it. Git stores everything internally not by the filename, but by the SHA-1 hash generated by the checksum.

* Git generally only adds data: It is very hard to get Git to remove or erase data from its internal database - removing files *adds* a snapshot - this makes it straightforward to step back on problems.

* The Three Stages: Git has a concept of three stages for a file it is tracking, modified, staged and commited, which comes from the the three main sections of a git project. 
    * Git has a current working directory which contains a single copy of one version of the project pulled out from the Git database for you to work on. Any files in the working directory that are different from that version in the database are considered modified.
    * Git has a staging area which is a file in your Git directory giving information on what modified files will go into the next commit, files in the staging area are considered to be staged.
    * Commited files are those whose changes are stored in the git directory.
    * Note that it is possible to skip the staged state entirely.

* You don't have to use the command line (although some of the power is only available that way)
    * Modern Visual Studio has Git support built in
    * Free clients like Tortoise Git, Git for Windows, Atlassian SourceTree
    * Paid for clients like Git Kraken, Smart Git or Tower

* Lots of Git resources and support around:
    * Pro Git - You could pay Amazon for a copy of this book, but the whole thing is available for free online at [https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2)
    * Several Pluralsight courses can teach you the basics, or take a deep dive into how Git works
    * Git is used extensively so lots of help on the internet
 
* Demo Time - working with Git using the Scratch project on Azure Devops.